
# Whatabout Making Chinese Students feel Unsafe?

The language of social justice has often become feebly weaponized by chinese students and the CCP, by saying that criticism of china "causes harm" to chinese students or "makes them feel unsafe".

There are a dozen reasons why this argument is ignorant, and demonstrates a sort of "surface-level" understanding of power of social justice language in silencing opposition, but not any of the intersectional education or progressive thinking needed to weild it. It is especially offensive to Asian Americans who faced *true* racism. 

Even so, such accusations of racism must always be taken seriously - especially if we are to call ourselves a liberal nation. I *do* think that it's important to make sure Chinese people feel welcome in the USA, and that we don't subject them to ignorant comments like "go back to your country" or accuse them of being spies when there is no evidence to support it. I am all too aware of the violence inflicted upon asian bodies in urban cities in the USA since the start of the pandemic.

However, that does not mean that the *political regime* in China is above criticism. It is cowardly for a government to hide behind accusations of racism of its ethnic majority.

# Similarities between Russian and Chinese Rhetoric on Unification


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yQqthbvYE8M&t=80s

# How should the USA deal with china?
china
https://twitter.com/kamilkazani/status/1498695698832924677


https://twitter.com/christogrozev/status/1498029060085075969?s=20&t=2dVNsJkEs4ES_XHcR4Ui5A


Chess Boxing is a game in which players alternate between games of chess and trying to knock each other out. The game ends when 

In many ways, the geopolitical struggle between the "global order" (e.g. the Western countries) and its enemies (e.g. Russia, China) is like a long game of Chess Boxing, except Russia has suddenly decided to start the Boxing round of the game.

# Ripple Effects

Rapid de-globalization causes shortages and production problems for everyone.

- Energy shortages - Germany/EU relies on russian oil for energy. 
- Disruption of supply chains https://twitter.com/typesfast/status/1497656904977289216?s=20&t=EoO0x1i9O0H7GnL9Pj0Uvw
- Palantir stock 
- https://twitter.com/SHamiltonian/status/1497716768135016451 sanctions make russian ruble worthless

if you are mainland chinese,  you may be interested to watch this video by a young Russian woman who says that the majority of her people are forced to stay silent for fear of their lives. 
https://twitter.com/LanceUSA70/status/1497324393827119105

Heroism of Ukranian President Zelensky has won the hearts and souls of the international community. How could you not get behind a martyr who puts on a military uniform and arms himself with his fellow soldiers to defend his country, while Putin sits behind a desk, isolated and risking nothing personally?

Zelensky has won the *narrative war*, the one that plays out on social media and the court of popular opinion.

This is perhaps a lesson for Taiwanese playbook, who obviously cannot win the kinetic war against China but can win the narrative war, as a democracy-loving country.
 
China is *exceptionally* bad at convincing other countries that it has any principles beyond expanding its own power and punishing the west for the 100 years of humiliation - it has built no social capital that it is a trustworthy ally.




I think I could pick up cyberdefense.

I am no political strategist, so please think of this essay as coming from a citizen exercising his liberty to speak his mind freely, and nothing more.

I think reading Liu Cixin's 2nd book in his three body trilogy "Dark Forest" is highly instructive to think about how the Chinese think about engaging with an enemy.

Perhaps one of the important applications of AI is to augment our ability to reason through future possible outcomes when thinking about how to spend our energy.

For instance, if we spend X million dollars fighting a partisan political issue, how much more susceptible are we to being unable to respond to a Chinese invasion of Taiwan?


<!-- describe what happened in the book -->

thanks to the internet and payment systems like cryptocurrency, the world comes to the defense of a country in an instant.

Much like how citizen scientists pored over data in the coronavirus pandemic, people are volunteering their time to help in way sthey can.

The cyber community is obviously jumping in

I also wonder if this will change the attitudes AI scientists have towards war. I have seen 

Now that I am no longer employed at Google, and in the blissful gap period where I am thinking about what to do next, 
I feel less conflicted about publishing pieces like this on my blog.

Gallows Humor in which a Ukrainian mom and her daughter "thank" Putin with their thumbs up as their house burns in the background
 
https://twitter.com/maxseddon/status/1497631706819485696

- technology pacifists (people who criticized autonomous drones look tone deaf now)

- Like a game of Chess Boxing where the other player suddenly decides he wants to start boxing instead of playing Chess

- China and Taiwan
On one hand, China sees how the world unites behind

- The role of technology companies in Geopolitics

- Enemies think longer term

Uyghurs

China is monitoring the situation closely, because this is forming their playbook for how they will plan to invade Taiwan. I hope to God that the international outcry will be just as strong. 




Statements from Hua Chunying (Foreign Ministry Spokesperson)

https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/202202/t20220224_10645282.html

seething with rhetoric about how the US is acting in bad terms, about how China is "above it all" 

paladium exports
gas prices go up inflation
china sees further adoption of the yuan

